---
layout: default
title: 2019-08-23
---

## TRIZ and Design Thinking

### Background

It is of certain interest to compare Design Thinking and TRIZ as two
"invention metodologies".  We had such a [discussion within the Leipzig
Seminar](https://github.com/wumm-project/Leipzig-Seminar/tree/master/2019-05-02)
(in German) based on papers of Claudia Hentschel and Darell Mann on May 02,
2019.  See also the Slides of Tobias Zschietzschmann there.

There was another discussion (in Russian) about that topic around [a
post](https://www.facebook.com/valeri.souchkov/posts/10212381192160003) on the
facebook channel of Valeri Souchkov in August 2019.  Here the contributions to
the discussion by Andrei Kuryan and Valeri Souchkov are extracted and
translated to English.

Hans-Gert Gräbe, August 23, 2019

### The Original Contributions in the Facebook Thread

#### Andrei Kuryan

ТРИЗ и DT (ДМ) - это конечно же разные вещи!  Область DT - пользовательский
опыт и проблемы, которые там возникают.  Область ТРИЗ - это системы
(технические, информационные, бизнес) и проблемы которые в них возникают.

Когда ux-researcher начинает лезть в технологию, то без знания основ, в т.ч.,
ТРИЗ, это выглядит убого. И наоборот, когда инженер лезет в область
пользовательского опыта без подготовки, получается "как всегда".

Я как раз и сказал о том, что проблемы в DT и ТРИЗ имеют разную природу.
Методы их решения тем более отличаются. Поэтому сравнивать ТРИЗ и DT
некорректно.

Одна из 1-х успешных попыток совместить DT и инженерные практики - это QFD в
70-х.  В 00-х в системной инженерии на уровне стандартов введено различие
между требованиями стейкхолдеров и системными требованиями.  MPV - это попытка
(натянуть сову на глобус, зачеркнуто) соединить требования стейкхолдеров с
функциональным анализом в версии ФСА-ТРИЗ. Насколько удачная, не буду
оценивать, но не встречал, чтобы кто-то использовал на практике.

1) DT и ТРИЗ, DT и инженерные практики - это не одно и то же
2) Совместное использование DT и инженерных практик имеет давнюю историю (QFD).
3) В ТРИЗ тоже предпринималишь попытки соединить DT и ТРИЗ - инструменты (MPV).
4) Из такого соединения (успешного или нет) не следует, что DT и ТРИЗ - это одно и то же. 

#### Valeri Souchkov

Можно посмотреть мою [видео презентацию](https://youtu.be/qCwqBDsb_W4 ) на
русском про RCA+ - вариант ПСА адаптированный для ТРИЗ.  Публикациии у меня
все на английском.

Про DT (дизайн мышление) статей много и на русском. Про дизайн мышление можно
[прочитать
здесь](https://skillbox.ru/media/design/chto_takoe_dizayn_myshlenie/).  Сразу
отмечу, что DT вообще не включает в себя никаких методов решения проблем или
генерации новых идей. Это просто шаг в процессе, а как его делать - уже пусть
думает сам "мыслитель".

Основное отличие DT это первый, эмпатический этап. "Залезть в шкуру" клиента и
посмотреть его глазами на ситуацию - увидеть проблемы и возможности. А затем
уже сконструировать максимально удобное и эффективное решение. Но как решать
проблемы - DT не говорит. Тут уж нужен конструкторско-дизайнерский опыт
решателя.  Английское слово design имеет больше толкований, чем его
русскоязычный аналог. У него есть и такие равнозначные значения, как
"сконструировать", "создать образ".

Про DT почитайте [вот эту хорошую статью](https://habr.com/ru/post/413641/).
Кстати, объясняет откуда растут ноги популярности (про редактора Business
Week, а то многие думают, что DT вдруг само собой всех затмило).

Единая методика преподавания невозможна, как и нет единой методики
приготовления омлета. Не существует единых методик преподавания математики или
физики... Везде есть и всегда будут свои девиации и варианты. Есть авторские
методики, хорошие, или не очень - уже зависит. Другое дело - учебные
программы, которые включают в себя перечни необхимых для обучения тем и их
последовательность. Такие программы есть у МАТРИЗ, Института Альтшуллера,
университетах, где проподается ТРИЗ. Но вот единого центра координации таких
программ нет и не будет. 

### English Translation

#### Andrei Kuryan

TRIZ and DT are of course different things!  The area of ​​DT is the user
experience and the problems that arise there.  The TRIZ area are systems
(technical, informational, business) and problems which arise in them.

When ux-researcher begins to climb into technology, then without knowledge of
the basics, including, TRIZ, it looks pathetic. And vice versa, when an
engineer climbs into the area of user experience without preparation, it turns
out "as always."

I just said that the problems in DT and TRIZ are of different nature.  The
methods for solving are the more different. Therefore, compare TRIZ and DT is
incorrectly.

One of the first successful attempts to combine DT and engineering practices
is QFD in 1970's.  In the 2000's, in systems engineering a distinction at the
standards level was introduced between stakeholder requirements and system
requirements.  MPV is an attempt (to pull an owl on a globe, crossed out) to
connect the requirements of the stakeholders with functional analysis in the
FSA-TRIZ version. How successful I will not evaluate, but I have not seen
anyone using it in practice.

1) DT and TRIZ, DT and engineering practices are not the same thing.
2) The combined use of DT and engineering practices has a long history (QFD). 
3) In TRIZ, you also attempt to combine DT and TRIZ-tools (MPV).
4) From such a connection (successful or not) it does not follow that DT and
   TRIZ are one and the same. 

#### Valeri Souchkov

You can watch my [video presentation](https://youtu.be/qCwqBDsb_W4) in Russian
about RCA+ - a RCA option adapted for TRIZ. My publications all are in
English.

There are many articles in Russian about DT (design thinking).  About design
thinking you can [read
here](https://skillbox.ru/media/design/chto_takoe_dizayn_myshlenie/). 

I note right away that DT does not include any problem-solving methods at all
or generating new ideas. This is just a step in the process, and how to do it
is already left to the thinker himself.

The main difference to DT is the first, empathic stage. "Get into the shoes"
of the client and look with his eyes at the situation - see the problems and
opportunities. And then already design the most convenient and efficient
solution. But how to decide problems - DT doesn't say. Here you need design
experience solver. The english word design has more meanings than it
Russian-language analogue. It has such equivalent values ​​as "design", "create
an image".

About DT read [this good article here](https://habr.com/en/post/413641/). By
the way, it explains where the legs of popularity grow out (about the editor
of Business Week, otherwise many people think that DT suddenly by itself
eclipsed all). 

A unified teaching methodology is impossible, as there is no unified
methodology to cook an omelet. There are no unified methods of teaching
mathematics or physics ... Everywhere there are and always will be their
deviations and options. There are authors' methodologies, good, or not so good
- it already depends. Training is another matter, where programs include lists
of topics required to learn and their sequence. MATRIZ, The Altshuller
Institute, universities where TRIZ is served have such programs. But a single
center for coordination of such programs doesn't exist and never will be.
