---
layout: default
title: HGG-Blog
---

# Valeri Souchkov about the role of ideas for solutions in complex challenges

Source (2020-03-09): 
<https://www.facebook.com/valeri.souchkov/posts/10213730778098808>

English translation (supported by deepl.com), Russian original below. 

## Ideas? Solutions? Ideas for solutions!

In the mid-1990s I was invited to talk about TRIZ by Han de Ronde, at that
time one of the vice presidents of the Dutch company Philips. As usual, in my
presentation I mentioned one of the advantages of TRIZ over other methods of
idea creation, which seemed to me most important at that time. "TRIZ allows
you to quickly generate new innovative ideas!" I said. Khan breathed a sigh
and said, "New ideas... Why do we need them? We have so many ideas of our own
that we don't know what to do with them!"

This answer slightly broke the picture of the world that was already in my
professional consciousness by then. How so? Before that, I used TRIZ primarily
to create new ideas!

However, having got acquainted with the portfolio of ideas for new products
created as a result of numerous brainstorms, the situation became clear. As
they say, "the eye had nothing to hang on to". There were a lot of ideas, but
... The vast majority were not attractive, did not create an effect "wow!",
which would reflect not only the novelty and originality of ideas, but most
importantly - their consumer value. And those few, looking at which, I wanted
to say "wow!" looked too far from possible implementation.

What kind of ideas do we need? It all depends on the goals. If we only need
ideas for the sake of the ideas themselves, that's one thing. In such cases,
the determining criteria will be originality and creativity. And if we need
ideas for new products, new services, new types of business, then their value
is primarily determined by how effective, competitive and implementable they
will be.

In 2019 CB Insights published statistics, according to which the largest
percentage of reasons for startups failure - 42% - is not even due to lack of
financial or human resources. The reason is that the valuable propositions
offered by startups - new products or services, as it turns out, are not
needed by the market. That's impressive.

So what ideas are needed? The strongest ideas are those that offer solutions
to current problems. Saving us from harmful and undesirable effects, or
significantly increasing productivity - both in the home and in business. And
those that give us new opportunities or radically improve or diversify our
user experience, both on the functional and emotional levels.

Today there are dozens of tools to quickly generate new ideas based on
psychological or combinational techniques. Most of them are quite simple, they
can be used even by preschoolers.

So far, one of the criteria for the effectiveness of creative search has been
the number of ideas generated. It is understood that the more ideas are
offered, the higher is the probability that at least one of them will be
successful. This approach is effective in situations where the initial task is
quite simple, or in areas of creative industry where the threshold for
limitations is low, such as in advertising or in fantasy literature. And a
complex problem, especially in those areas where there are severe restrictions
- either material or financial, or some other, may require the generation of
thousands of ideas, and the chances of success are drastically reduced.

As a result, the methods we are used to create new ideas based on random
search are not very effective in generating successful ideas - ideas that
solve problems while meeting multiple constraints and requirements and that
are well integrated into existing infrastructure. TRIZ has emerged precisely
as a response to the challenge of an exponentially complex society, which
requires addressing increasingly complex problems in an increasingly
restrictive environment.

TRIZ is more difficult to use than simple methods of creative idea creation.
Firstly, the problem has to be found, recognized, properly formulated. Then it
is necessary to find such ideas of solutions, which will meet the set
criteria. Then to estimate and choose the most perspective idea. Moreover,
complex problems are not solved at once, but require work with the whole
complex of secondary problems. Today in TRIZ a complex of tools supporting all
phases of the problem solving cycle is created: from search to evaluation. But
the main advantage of TRIZ is the accumulated heuristic complex, which allows
avoiding the generation of thousands of ideas and directing the search in the
right direction at once.

Nevertheless, simple tools for generating ideas are also needed. First of all,
they allow developing creative imagination. Not all of us have deeply
developed creative thinking, but the brain can be trained - and it gives
tangible results. Science today knows very little about what creative thinking
is, but the fact that this type of thinking can be developed is a
well-established fact.

To summarize: ideas are the basis that creates and sustains the progress of
civilization. Not all ideas have value. We need those that solve problems,
while meeting numerous conditions, and fit into the existing world. Ideas for
solutions. These are the kind of ideas that one should learn to create first.

And with Han de Ronde, we are still good...

## Идеи? Решения? Идеи решений!

В середине 1990х меня пригласил рассказать про ТРИЗ Хан де Ронде, в те времена
один из вице-президентов голландской компании Philips. Как обычно, в своей
презентации я упомянул одно из казавшихся тогда важнейших преимуществ ТРИЗ
перед другими методами создания идей. «ТРИЗ позволяет быстро генерировать
новые инновационные идеи!», сказал я. Хан вздохнул и ответил: «Новые идеи… А
зачем они нам? У нас столько своих идей, что мы не знаем, что с ними делать!»

Такой ответ немного сломал картину мира, к тому времени уже сложившуюся в моем
профессиональном сознании. Как так? Ведь до этого я использовал ТРИЗ прежде
всего для того, чтобы создавать новые идеи!

Однако познакомившись с портфолио идей для новых продуктов, созданных в
результате многочисленных мозговых штурмов, ситуация прояснилась. Как
говорится, «глазу не за что было зацепиться». Идей было много, но… Подавляющее
большинство не привлекали, не создавали эффект «вау!», который бы отражал не
только новизну и оригинальность идей, но и главное - их потребительскую
ценность. А те немногие, глядя на которые, хотелось сказать «вау!» выглядели
слишком далекими от возможной реализации.

Какие же идеи нам нужны? Все зависит от целей. Если идеи нам нужны лишь ради
самих идей, это одно. В таких случаях определяющими критериями будут
оригинальность и креативность. А если нам нужны идеи новых продуктов, новых
услуг, новых видов бизнеса, то их ценность в первую очередь определяется тем,
насколько они будут эффективны, конкурентноспособны и внедряемы.

В 2019 CB Insights опубликовал статистику, согласно которой самый большой
процент причин неудачи стартапов – 42% - вызван совсем даже не нехваткой
финансовых или человеческих ресурсов. Причина в том, что предлагаемые
стартапами ценностные предложения – новые продукты или услуги, как выясняется,
рынку не нужны. Впечатляет.

Так какие же идеи нужны? Самые сильные идеи это те, которые предлагают решения
актуальных проблем. Избавляющие нас от вредных и нежелательных эффектов, или
позволяющие значительно увеличить производительность – как в домашнем быту,
так и в бизнесе. А еще те, которые дают нам новые возможности или позволяют
радикально улучшить или разнообразить наш пользовательский опыт, как на
функциональном, так и на эмоциональном уровнях.

Инструментов быстрой генерации новых идей, основанных на психологических или
комбинаторных приемах, сегодня существуют десятки. Большинство из них довольно
просты, их могут применять даже дошкольники.

До сих пор одним из критериев результативности творческого поиска являлось
количество сгенерированных идей. Подразумевается, что чем больше предложено
идей, тем выше вероятность, что хотя бы одна из них окажется успешной. Такой
подход эффективен в тех ситуациях, когда исходная задача достаточно проста,
либо же в тех областях креативной индустрии, где низок порог ограничений,
например, в рекламе или литературе жанра фэнтэзи. А сложная проблема, особенно
в тех областях, где действуют жесткие ограничения – или материальные, или
финансовые, или еще какие-то, может потребовать генерации тысяч идей, и шансы
на успех кардинально снижаются.

В итоге привычные нам методы создания новых идей на основе случайного поиска
оказываются малоэффективными для создания успешных идей – таких, которые
решают проблемы и при этом удовлетворяют многочисленным ограничениям и
требованиям, и к тому же хорошо интегрируются в существующую
инфраструктуру. ТРИЗ появилась именно как ответ на вызов экспоненциально
усложняющегося общества, требующего решения все более сложных проблем в
условиях усиливающихся ограничений.

ТРИЗ использовать сложнее, чем простые методы творческого создания идей.
Во-первых, проблему нужно найти, распознать, правильно сформулировать. Затем
найти такие идеи решений, которые удовлетворят заданным критериям. Затем
оценить и выбрать наиболее перспективную идею. Более того, сложные проблемы не
решаются сразу, а требуют работы с целым комплексом вторичных проблем. Сегодня
в ТРИЗ создан комплекс инструментов, поддерживающих все фазы цикла решения
проблемы: от поиска до оценки. Но основное преимущество ТРИЗ — это накопленный
комплекс эвристик, которые позволяют избежать генерации тысяч идей, а сразу
направить поиск в нужном направлении.

Тем не менее простые инструменты генерации идей тоже нужны. В первую очередь
они позволяют развивать творческое воображение. Не все из нас обладают глубоко
развитым творческим мышлением, но мозг можно тренировать – и это дает ощутимый
результат. Наука сегодня знает ничтожно мало о том, что такое творческое
мышление, но то, что этот вид мышления можно развивать – хорошо подтвержденный
факт.

Резюмируя: идеи – это базис, который создает и обеспечивает прогресс
цивилизации. Но ценностью обладают далеко не все идеи, а те, которые решают
проблемы, при этом удовлетворяют многочисленным условиям, и вписываются в
существующий мир. Идеи решений. Вот такие и нужно учиться создавать прежде
всего.

А с Ханом де Ронде мы до сих пор остаемся хорошими друзьями. Правда, в итоге
все вышло не так, как планировалось – не он стал пользователем ТРИЗ, а,
скорее, наоборот – но это уже другая история.
