---
layout: default
title: 2021-12-29
---

# Results of the TRIZ Developers' Summit Conference 2021

26 October 2021.


The International Conference _TRIZ Developers Summit_ "TRIZ in Development" is
one of the major annual events of the TRIZ community. In 2021, the conference
was held in online format on October 15 and 16 - TRIZ in Technology, IT and
Business, and on August 23 - TRIZ in Education. The conference was dedicated
to the 95th anniversary of the TRIZ founder G.S. Altshuller.  There were 36
speakers from Belarus, Germany, Israel, Kazakhstan, Latvia, the Netherlands,
Poland, Russia, and the USA, 11 of them TRIZ Masters.  About 500 attendees
from 33 countries took part in the conference: Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Colombia, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malaysia, Malta, Norway, Poland, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Switzerland,
Taiwan, Turkey, Ukraine, United States.

In the section _TRIZ applications in technology, IT and business_ was
presented a wide range of material on TRIZ development as a scientific theory.
Research in the area of TRIZ Ontology, TRIZ applications in manufacturing
enterprises, medicine and business problem solving were discussed. The
importance of a general theory of System Evolution was discussed, which would
allow to apply TRIZ for inventive problem solving in any field of human
activities. The main idea of the TRIZ Developers Summit is to unite and
coordinate different fields of TRIZ development: development of the scientific
foundations of TRIZ, practical application of TRIZ in technology, IT and
business, TRIZ education and training of TRIZ specialists.

In the section _TRIZ in Education_, the participants discussed presentations
representing various TRIZ schools, different approaches to TRIZ teaching and
TRIZ methods for innovative changes in training and education. During the
discussion and summing up the results of the section, participants discussed
common problems in TRIZ education: the organisation of TRIZ trainings is still
initiated by enthusiasts and not supported by state programs.

The main goal of TRIZ methods in education is to develop inventive and
creative thinking and educate people a proactive attitude towards life.  In
order to realise this goal, it is necessary to combine new curriculum content
which focuses on the tools for inventive problem solving, research methods for
systems evolution and methods, forming variability, flexibility, criticality,
and systemic thinking.

The conference participants unanimously adopted an appeal to the authorities
of Baku, the city where G.S. Altshuller lived, to perpetuate the memory of
the TRIZ founder in his hometown.

The conference materials (presentations and videos) are available at
<https://triz-summit.ru/confer/tds2021/>.

The next TRIZ Summit Conference is scheduled for October 14-16, 2022.

See you at next year's conference!

Best regards, TRIZ SUMMIT 2021 Organising Committee.