---
layout: default
title: About
---

About the WUMM Project
------------------------------

Contradictions and management methodologies (WUMM abbreviates the German
"Widersprüche und Managementmethoden") is in our view the core of the
implementation of TRIZ (Teoria Reschenija Isobretatjelskich Sadatsch), the
theory of solving invention problems of the Russian invention researcher
Genrich Saulowitsch Altshuller, who worked over 50 years on such questions,
especially based on patent searches. However, WUMM goes far beyond this
approach and focuses on complex innovation and management scenarios in
companies.

While Altschullers considerations are directed more on solving technical
problems and thus to possible technical solution the WUMM approach
concentrates on the broader scope of practical innovation challenge to the
management of internal processes.

In doing so, terminological shifts and clarifications of the last 50 years
have to be considered. Altshuller's foundation are patents that can refer to
inventions only, not to discoveries. Nevertheless, concrete discoveries also
play a major role in Altshuller's texts. A theoretical distinction between
these two concepts, which is practically tied to the question of
patentability, has been tried many times. However, an unbiased analysis of
these attempts shows that they arise, above all, from different epistemic
understandings of the cognitive process itself:

* Discoveries are part of an academic cognitive process in which
  referencability, connectivity, and cooperative review processes are at the
  forefront. The conditions for such a ["standing on the shoulders of giants,
  which also allows dwarfs to look a little
  further"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_on_the_shoulders_of_giants),
  have improved with the networking possibilities of the digital change once
  again by orders of magnitude.

* Inventions are part of the economic-practical design process of the
  ["Metabolism with Nature"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metabolic_rift), in
  which the appropriate appreciation of the use of economic resources has to be
  ensured.

However, in the first case, too, considerable expenditure is required (for
example, for the construction and operation of major research facilities such
as the LHC where the Higgs boson was discovered), while in the latter case the
legal protection of such intellectual property rights becomes a veritable
obstacle to the progression of the cognitive process.

Also, a hard distinction between discoveries and inventions is no longer
timely, because it has become more evident that the economic-practical
implementation of new problem-solving approaches based on advancing
technological development is a multi-dimensional practical process involving
concrete discoveries and inventions with planned development are closely
interlinked with material and personnel innovation potential as well as the
facilitation and design of corresponding innovation processes. In the transfer
and further development of Altshuller's contradictory approaches, especially
in this area, we expect a significant advance of management approaches as a
whole.

TRIZ is an important attempt to make innovative doing talkable. Various
practical experiences with this methodology were collected in the GDR inventor
schools, analyzed and extended to socio-technical contradictions. These
developments, which have always been suspiciously eyed by the leading
ideologues of the GDR, are part of practical experiences of socio-technical
management at the lower level of GDR trust structures (Kombinate), which in
many respects were organized and operated like corporations. Hansjürgen Linde's
dissertation 1988 at TU Dresden and his "contradiction-oriented innovation
strategies" (WOIS) were a first attempt to systematically summarize these
approaches.  Another approach - ProHEAL ("Programm zur Herausarbeitung von
Erfindungen und Lösungen", Program for the Elaboration of Inventions and
SSolutions) - by Hans-Joachim Rindfleisch and Rainer Thiel was developed at the
same time in parallel and has many overlap with Linde's methodological approach
(to be honest: both were developed in tight cooperation with Rainer Thiel, one
of the reviewers of Linde's thesis, as linking edge).

With CMMI and ISO/IEC 15504, maturity models for the evaluation of
entrepreneurial management structures have been established in the field of
software development, which can also be transferred to other areas of
industrial production with a high proportion of creative work in project-like
structures. The design of the high maturity levels 4 (quantitaviely managed)
and 5 (optimizing), which are based on the collection of appropriate process
indicators (maturity level 3), has undergone significant modifications in
recent years. Here, too, the importance of uncovering and processing
contradictions in error, change and innovation management became apparent.

As in TRIZ and WOIS, WUMM focuses on the dialectical approach to such
contradictions. Unlike WOIS that has protected their own approaches through
trademark rights thus constituting a closed world, and other TRIZ communities
with similar closure approaches, WUMM stand on the position of Open Culture.
One of its main goals is to make avaiable a substantial stock of TRIZ material,
texts and tools under the terms of the Apache 2.0 license.  In particular, we
concentrate on making available the ProHEAL methodology on such a basis.