---
layout: default
title: Corona
---

# Corona as a TRIZ Challenge

On Facebook I made the suggestion to apply a profound TRIZ analysis to the
Corona problem as a challenge full of contraditions to transform the harmful
into useful (or - at least - less harmful).

First, let me give an English translation of the proposal, presented on
Facebook in Russian:

<blockquote>

Corona is an excellent example of TRIZ application (at least in the OTSM-TRIZ
variant). Different local prototypical situations are generalized into an
<em>abstract problem</em> (doctors of intensive care hospital departments
intensively exchange their experience around the world), the problem <em>is
modeled</em> (it is better and better understood how exactly the "machine" -
the infectious process - works), the <em>process of transformation</em> of the
"technical system" (the global health care system) is developed and the
transformation is realized according to local conditions.

</blockquote>

Second, let me remind the tradition of TRIZ application to important world
challenges of mankind, as, e.g. in [this
analysis](http://www.gnrtr.com/Generator.html?pi=302&cp=3) of Nikolay
Shpakovsky of the oil desaster in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010.

The following approaches and papers were proposed:

- My post <https://www.facebook.com/groups/111602085556371/2915610628488822>
- Gennady Kizevich (2020-06-06): здесь уместно вспомнить
  - Диверсионный Анализ Б.Злотина и
  - Вредную Машину В.А.Леняшина.

  Обе теории могли помочь как в развитии конспирологических версий рождения
  К-вируса, так и в поиске лекарств от него.
  - I found the following links:
    - <https://www.metodolog.ru/01294/01294.html>
    - <https://www.metodolog.ru/01282/01282.html>
    - <https://www.metodolog.ru/00891/00891.html>
    - <https://www.metodolog.ru/00859/00859.html>

- Igor Zadesenets supplied a detailed analysis 
  - <https://www.facebook.com/groups/111602085556371/2934742723242279>

Недавний пост ... поставил вопрос о том, какие методы использовались
коронавирусом, и какие методы использовались человечеством для борьбы с
ним. Нужно признать, что вирус победил с разгромным счетом. Он не только
использует хитрый способ для того, чтобы проникнуть в клетку. Вирус также
блокирует фермент, который перерабатывает излишки примечательного вещества,
Ангиотензина 2 (АТ2). Избыток этого вещества в легких вызывает к сокращение
стенок сосудов, застой крови, повышение местного давления, избыточную
инфильтрацию в легкие плазмы крови, тромбообразование. Все это приводит к
особо острому течению пневмонии, а застой крови препятствует работе иммунной
системы. Вирус сам создает себе "тихую гавань". Этот механизм, в общих чертах,
известен с 2005 года, когда анализировались результаты эпидемии, вызванной
другим вирусом, COVID-1. <https://www.nature.com/articles/nm1267>. Тогда
удалось искусственно вызвать у мышей пневмонию и вылечить их веществами,
нейтрализующими действие АТ2. Однако, в результате некоторых не совсем
продуманных заявлений, подобные препараты оказались "забаненными". Только
после ретроспективных исследований, с них не только было снято подозрение, но
и появились данные об их высокой эффективности. Так, два исследования (из
четырех) показали, что риск смерти у пациентов, которые продолжали принимать в
госпитале ингибиторы АнгиотензинПревращающего Фермента (иАПФ) приблизительно
на две трети (!) ниже средних значений. Только сейчас начаты клинические
испытания этих препаратов и все они пока на стадии "рекрутинга". За что гибли
безвинные мышки?

Хочу отметить, я не утверждаю, что есть чудо-лекарство, я даже не могу
утверждать, что эти лекарства вообще полезны в данном случае. Вопрос в том,
что они не были исследованы. При этом клинических испытаний Хлорохина уже было
проведено добрый десяток, и еще десяток планируется. Зачем столько? Проводятся
клинические испытания таких сильнодействующих средств, как молитва (!) и йога
(!!!).

Это говорит о том, что никакого систематического поиска решений не
производилось. Проблема решается путем извращенного штурма: - "прав тот, кто
громче крикнет". Крикнул кто-то, находящийся в фокусе внимания, что препараты
могут навредить, и это не вызвало ничего, кроме панической реакции. Как
выстрел в стаде глупых антилоп. Одна из причин такого удручающего положения
дел в том, что систематические методы решений проблем занимают сегодня
маргинальную нишу. С чем мы все себя и должны поздравить.  Подробнее и со
ссылками все это было описано в моей предыдущей заметке. Спасибо, что дочитали
до конца.

A recent post ... raised the question of what methods are used by the
coronavirus and what methods were used by mankind to fight it. We have to
admit that the virus has won with a crushing score. It's not only using a
tricky way to get into the cage. The virus also blocks the enzyme that
recycles the surplus remarkable substance, Angiotensin 2 (AT2). Excess of this
substance in the lungs causes contraction of the vessel walls, blood
stagnation, increased local pressure, excessive infiltration into the lungs
plasma, thrombosis. All this leads to a particularly acute course of
pneumonia, and blood stagnation prevents the immune system from functioning.
The virus creates a "safe haven" for itself. This mechanism has been known
since 2005, when the results of an epidemic caused by another virus, COVID-1,
were analysed. <https://www.nature.com/articles/nm1267>. It was then possible
to artificially induce pneumonia in mice and cure them with substances that
neutralized the effects of AT2. However, as a result of some ill-conceived
claims, such drugs were 'banned'. Only after retrospective studies, they were
not only cleared of suspicion, but also the data on their high efficacy. Thus,
two studies (out of four) showed that the risk of death in patients who
continued to take antioxidant-converting enzyme inhibitors (iAPF) in hospital
was about two-thirds (!) below average. Clinical trials of these drugs have
only just begun, and they are all still in the "recruiting" phase. What were
innocent mice killed for?

I want to note that I do not claim that there is a miracle cure, I can not
even claim that these drugs are useful in this case. The question is, they
have not been investigated. There's already been a good ten clinical trials of
Chloroquine, and another ten are planned. Why so many? There are clinical
trials of such powerful drugs as prayer (!) and yoga (!!!).

This suggests that no systematic search for solutions has been carried out.
The problem is solved by a twisted storm: - "The one who screams louder is
right". Someone in the spotlight shouted that the drugs could be harmful, and
it caused nothing but a panic reaction. Like a shot in a herd of stupid
antelopes. One of the reasons for this depressing state of affairs is that
systematic problem-solving methods are now a marginal niche. For which we must
all congratulate ourselves.

All of this was described in more detail and with links in my previous post.
Thank you for reading it to the end.