---
layout: default
title: EID
---

# Towards an European Industrial Doctorate

During consultations in October 2019 with the Saxonian office that promotes EU
proposals, there was given the recommendation to think about an application
within the **Marie Skłodowska-Curie actions** (MSCA), in particular within the
MSCA-ITN-EID Industrial Doctorate Program.

The further discussion in the circle of the partners, however, made clear that
the TRIZ community currently does not have the required high academic
visibility to meet the MSCA high scientific standards that are matched against
the impact factors of publications of the core people submitting the proposal.
So far, TRIZ has little to offer here, as they have not yet seriously enough
sought academic reputation. In the long term, such an application is
interesting, but we had to place it on a broader basis, for example, building
bridges to academically recognized communities in neighboring areas such as
Systems Engineering and work on a common academic visuality here first.

Therefore, the previous considerations and links to this topic are only
summarized here as "quarry" and for further reference.

For MSCA see 
* [the Horizon 2020 website](https://www.kowi.de/Portaldata/2/Resources/horizon2020/wp/h2020-wp1820-msca.pdf)
* [the Marie Curie Actions web site](https://ec.europa.eu/research/mariecurieactions/actions/research-networks_en)

The focus of such an application must be on a joint doctoral program, which
only indirectly promotes further aspects of the development of a TTN (from
in-company trainings to integration in undergraduate academic education). 

MSCA-ITN-2020 offers funding for general **collaborative European Training
Networks** (ETN, 445 Mio. Euro), for **European Industrial Doctorates** (EID,
40 Mio. Euro) or **European Joint Doctorates** (EJD, 45 Mio. Euro).  EJD is
reserved for true academic joint doctorate programs, hence is not appropriate
for us.  ETN is very broad in its direction, hence the success rate was low.
The office claimed that the success rate was higher in MSCA-ITN-EID since
there are more focused requirements (both partners from academia and from
industry are requied in the consortium).

* [Application guide to MSCA-ITN-2020](https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/other/guides_for_applicants/h2020-guide-appl-msca-itn_en.pdf)
* [The call](https://www.kowi.de/Portaldata/2/Resources/horizon2020/wp/h2020-wp1820-msca.pdf)

Some more considerations about the constraints:
* European Industrial Doctorates (EID) projects consist of at least two
  institutions from different EU Member States and / or Associated States and
  different sectors that jointly supervise PhD students and provide training.
  At least one institution must be non-academic, primarily from industry. In
  addition, the networks can also integrate third-country institutions. The
  fellow's stay with the non-academic participant must be at least 50%. It is
  obligatory to enroll in a doctoral program as well as the joint supervision
  by the partners from the academic and non-academic field. The training will
  follow the "EU Principles for Innovative Doctoral Training".
* Such a structure is strongly related to the TRIZ level 5 certification
  program since this certification has comparable requirements.  By historical
  reasons the TRIZ graduation was so far mainly outside academia.  This is
  sharply changing in Asia where a tightly coupling of academic and
  non-academic graduation is on the way.  Europe is well advised not to miss
  the connection here.

### From the call

**Scope:** ITN (at large) supports competitively selected joint research
training and/or doctoral programmes, implemented by partnerships of
universities, research institutions, research infrastructures, businesses,
SMEs, and other socio-economic actors from different countries across Europe
and beyond.

Each programme should have a clearly identified supervisory board
co-ordinating network-wide training and establishing active and continuous
communication and exchange of best practice among the participating
organisations to maximise the benefits of the partnership.

The programme should exploit complementary competences of the participating
organisations, and enable sharing of knowledge, networking activities, the
organisation of workshops and conferences.

Training responds to well identified needs in defined research areas, with
appropriate references to inter-and multidisciplinary fields and follows the
EU Principles for Innovative Doctoral Training.  It should be primarily
focused on scientific and technological knowledge through research on
individual, personalised projects.

In order to increase the employability of the researchers, the research
training should be complemented by the meaningful exposure of each researcher
to the non-academic sector. Secondments of the researcher to other
beneficiaries and partner organisations are encouraged, but should be
relevant, feasible, beneficial for the researchers and in line with the
project objectives. ...

In EID, the joint supervision of the researcher must be ensured by at least
one supervisor from the academic sector and one supervisor from the
non-academic sector. These arrangements will be taken into account during the
evaluation of the proposal.

### Additional Information

There is a list of expected impact at several levels at the end of the call
that should be addressed in the proposal.

There is a [list of
projects](https://ec.europa.eu/research/mariecurieactions/sites/mariecurie2/files/itn-2018-list-of-projects_0.pdf)
that were successful within the last (2018) MSCA-ITN call.

Hans-Gert Gräbe - Last update 20 Nov 2019
