---
layout: default
title: TSN
---

# TRIZ Social Network

The idea of this WUMM subproject ist to set up a **TRIZ Social Network** (TSN)
similar to our attempt to set up a [Social
Network](https://symbolicdata.github.io/CASN) for the Computer Algebra
community.

The main source are different RDF files collected within the [WUMM RDFData
subproject](https://github.com/wumm-project/RDFData).  For the moment the
`People` and the `TRIZ-Summit-2019` data is mirrored (due to performance
reasons) and links are produced to view this data. 

## People in the TRIZ Social Network

For each person listed in the data base a URI is created to reference this
person in subsequent files (in particular as speakers in conference reports).
We store only spare information and encourage people to add more information,
in particular links to their homepages.

A first list of [People](http://wumm.uni-leipzig.de/people.php) was mainly
extracted from the web pages of the TRIZ Summit 2019 in Minsk and enriched
with some additional information.

## Conferences

A special function within the TSN could be overviews about past conferences,
i.e., to have a single source of reference, what were the talks, where to find
papers and slides etc.  Within [LIFIS](https://leibniz-institut.de) we use
such an [RDF based store](https://leibniz-institut.de/rdf/) of reports about
past conferences compliant with Linked Open Data rules already for several
years. I prepared a similar report about the **TRIZ Summit 2019** (see the
RDFData subproject) that is mirrored &ndash; as proof of concepts &ndash;
below.

* [TRIZ Summit 2019](http://wumm.uni-leipzig.de/conferences.php?conference=rdf/TRIZ-Summit-2019.rdf&people=rdf/People.rdf)

## Presentations

We collect [Presentations](http://wumm.uni-leipzig.de/presentations.php) from
different parties that are supplied to the public under the Terms of a
Creative Commons License.  See also the Presentations directory in our [web
repo](https://github.com/wumm-project/web).
