# Business TRIZ Online Winter 2021 26-27 Febr 2021 Chat

## Valeri Souchkov. TRIZ for Business and Management Training and Certification Curricula
   
13:29:46 Richard : Valeri - what part is currently most used within Business
TRIZ, that may make a disruptive move in the increasing use of TRIZ?

13:31:22 ives@p41.be : Valeri, what is the difference between value and
function to super system (cfr FA)?

13:37:22 Valeri Souchkov : Ives, value is a result. Value is subjective.
Function is action which leads toward result. Function is objective.

## Michael Iarossi. Rapid Prototyping for Business TRIZ: Accelerating TRIZ solutions using Agile

13:48:12 Freya : Mike, question - how did you find the acceptance of
incorporating TRIZ with Agile? Interested due to people often being only stuck
on one type of tool.

13:48:45 Richard : Great Mike, please guide me what kind of output each sprint
will result in - as input to the next sprint - and finally the outcome is
prototype.

13:50:48 ives@p41.be : Could we make the ideation phase so small (no 2 weeks
for sprint but 2 minutes) using agile so it would take less time to innovate?
What would we need to change in TRIZ or agile?

13:53:44 Michał Hałas : Mike, what is your resource webpage again?

13:53:54 Mike iarossi : Mikeiarossi.com

## Anton Kozhemyako. Getting started on a business problem

14:18:39 Michał Hałas : Anton, please explain more those customers societies,
what they are?

14:19:26 Bing Han : What is the core principle of the schematization?

14:20:10 Richard : If you may compare the FA-matrix, is this analog to
schematization?

14:21:36 RLP : Anton, in your last example: which task(s) lead to the most
important insights and what measures where then established to solve the
problem (extend time to 1,5 years)?

14:22:47 Richard : What about trimming, as we may use in Bu-Triz

14:30:08 Anton Kozhemyako : Email for communicating: info@bmtriz.ru,
anton.kojemyako@yandex.ru, Web: www.bmtriz.ru

## Rohaya Mohd-Nor. Constructing an ecosystem for a sustainable innovation culture using TRIZ tools

14:42:29 Richard : Dr. Rohaya, Althuller should be so happy to see TRIZ in
educational use and also combine with UN-Sustainability Development Goals,
please go on with your good work !!

14:50:23 RLP : Hello Rohaya, at the beginning of your session you've explained
your TRIZ-journey from the very start but why was TRIZ choosen?  Which other
alternatives were discussed and why were they not choosen?

15:05:04 Ian Denney : Rohaya, can you identify the moment that you found
others adopting, or desiring to use TRIZ methods? Was there a method you can
share that helped get it over the initial starting adoption stages?

## Moritz Gekeler. Game of Conflicts – A playful way to analyze contradictions in TRIZ
   
15:41:24 Hans-Gert Gräbe : I read that the game was developed especially for
the design thinking community. How is it received there? Uli Weinberg fought
the "TRIZ Monster" at one of our workshops ...

15:41:54 Eckhard Schüler-Hainsch : I haven't talked to him yet…  But thanks
for the mentioning. I (Moritz) will definitely talk to him!

15:44:55 Hans-Gert Gräbe : Has the approach been included by the DT folks in
their portfolio?

15:52:29 Michał Hałas : I would love to see a filmed game, how it goes -
example. Record and put it on yutube

15:53:26 Richard : Would you use this in a case when you may get in a state of
challanging a "normal" route of TRIZ-approach? 

15:57:01 Richard : I like your playful approach …

## Olga Eckardt. Remote work challenges

16:24:38 Richard : Dear Olga, did you apply any FA in approaching your team
work issue, and where did you rank the problem?

16:30:17 Richard : Correct, you are tackling a great task, if you find a
solution, I give you the Nobelprize in Economics in Stockholm next year?

16:45:26 Victor Fey : Why do you suggest using the 5-Whys approach, while
there are other, more effective tools for getting into the causes(s) of the
problem, such as cause-effect chain analysis and RCA+?

## Denys Petrov. Analysis and practice of solving business problems

16:55:22 Richard : For me, this sounds like a combination of FA, as in the
five funtions (positive ,negativ …) and separation of physical properties in
ARIZ... or do I take a wrong conclusion of e.g. A - anti-B?  Maybe subsystem/
supersystem and standard inventives in BI-TRIZ is an alternative?

16:55:49 ives@p41.be : How to find systematically the “P” factor?

16:56:43 Richard : I see, all those you mentioned are indeed costly, I like
your findings that TRIZ is a cost-efficient approach.

16:57:21 Bing Han : In fact we can use the logic of ARIZ to generate the ideas
faster, in the real problem, time should be considered as cost.

16:58:19 Victor Fey : Brainstorming is much simpler than TRIZ, why bother with
the latter?

17:01:08 Victor Fey : It’s a reference of the simplicity of the 5-Whys
vs. RCA+.

17:01:25 Richard : Very interesting … Brainstorming vs TRIZ... let discuss
that over a beer ...

17:14:34 Siegfried Weigert : @Victor: Brainstorming generates ideas (no matter
whether they are realizable or not) "I want to have". TRIZ generates ideas for
realistic products (Following the rules of math and physics of the real world)
"I can have". Of course, real live is not that easy.  There are greyscales...

17:16:59 Olga Eckardt : In the reality we are questioning every business
process “what is the value of this”, and “if we do this because we do”, or we
have some meaning of this - added value. But this is not happening in daily
life, only in project life-cycle.

17:17:19 Siegfried Weigert : @Richard: "Desireable" vs. "Doable"?

## Ralf Laue. The Power of the Ideal Final Result for Identifying Process Optimization Potential

17:22:53 RLP : Hello Ralf, how did you generate the stickers/labels? How
did you make sure that you cover all possible stickers/labels?

17:28:29 Siegfried Weigert : I like Ralf's approch with the stickers:
Non-verbal communication can be SO EFFECTIVE. It gives you another set of ears
as Schulz von Thun, the "godfather" of modern communication theory, says.

17:35:54 Siegfried Weigert : There is a great Matriz glossary about TRIZ.  Is
there a counterpart for BusinessTRIZ?  That would be really helpful.
Especially communicating across different cultures...

17:37:37 RLP : To me it seems as if the concept of gamification becomes more
important also for TRIZ: we've heared such ideas in "game of conflicts" and in
Ralfs "sticker approach". Are there some more "games" known in TRIZ / Business
TRIZ (beside the card-sets for the 40 innovative principles)?

17:38:19 Ralf Laue : There are two books "Playing TRIZ" Vol 1+2

17:38:52 Bing Han : Wonderful. I hope to participate the glossary of Business
TRIZ in Chinese.

17:39:35 Eckhard Schueler-Hainsch : You will find an article about the Game of
Conflicts in the "Playing TRIZ Vol.  2" :-)

17:40:11 Siegfried Weigert : How about (more) You-Tubifications?  We need more
(engaged) young people in our community.  Maybe Youtube could be a channel to
reach them?

17:41:27 Richard : Valeri - you touch upon algorithm, are there any Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and TRIZ in the World ?

17:41:59 Olga Krasheninnikova : We could discuss a review of games for the
next conference, maybe my pedagogical background might help.

17:43:28 From Jefford : How would TRIZ be utilized to better address the 2021
Australia Govt. Intervention regulation? Amazon must pay News Media to help
pay reporters media costs. Amazon solution: Stopped the News coverage, Google
partnershiped.

## Show-Jane Lin. Resolving the Dilemma of Monitors in Kindergartens by Business TRIZ
   
13:30:41 Raphaela : Hello Showjane, have you analysed what aspect of a person
(student/teacher) is necessary to be monitored?  Can termographic cameras be
used?

13:31:14 Richard : Dear Showjane, a great work, very nice case. Please tell
about the monitor function - a person or a function / procedure ? Could
monitor seen as a "boss"?

13:33:45 Richard : I rephrase my question: - XX Children, YY teachers and ZZ
monitors?

13:34:18 Arthur Jefford : Monitors could also be used to increase productivity
by reviewing T&S flow patterns.

13:35:59 Siegfried Weigert : Translation issues lead us back to the glossary.
I personally ask myself what is meant with "in disguise": Blurred ("Pixeled")?

## Valeri Souchkov. TRIZ in Financial Industry

14:06:31 Richard : Dear Valeri, where would you place "e-commerce", since I
see many conventional step in BD that may be overseen when entering the
market.

## Han Bing. Solving the problem of construction mode for traditional industry park in the large cities

14:27:33 Hans-Gert Gräbe : What type of field does F stand for in the SuField
diagrams?

14:30:35 Anton Kozhemyako : Hello, Han! Thanks a lot for the great case!
There is a question about a resolving way.  What do you think about resolution
of contradictions in the high level of studying problem? What advantage does
this approach have?

14:30:41 Richard : Dear Bing Han, beautiful first and secondary problem…  just
for my understanding "start-up"-home, like that, and as start-up company, most
incubators are welcoming comanpies for 12-18 month, will you need that flow
through of companies for your case in start-up homes.

14:32:23 Arthur Jefford : Covid is waging war with current concepts of the
built Environment. Our Environmental Enclosures need to be versatile to
convert layout and applications …. Today many central business towers will be
changing to condominiums at excessive costs.

14:35:49 Richard : Is that paper you referred to available in English,
possible to share?

## Youn-Jan Lin. Using Business TRIZ Method to Improve the Speed of Checkout Process of Convenience Stores

15:05:53 Richard : Dear Youjam, a very detailed question: your RCA+, left
double full stop - and right double stop - intense market competition. Do they
refer to the same occasion? I am aware of that BD-TRIZ does not refer to any
time flow nor space - but does that make sense in your case. Just curious?

15:09:09 Arthur Jefford : Flow Pattern utilization C&S Review to improve
efficiency and experience.

## Zhang Ting. How to use TRIZ on information flow management

15:58:05 Richard : Dear Mr. Zhang, TRIZ likes to work with contraditions as in
guiding us onwards in problem solving, how did your formulate your problem?
Ex: Big car is attractive but driving around every day is not good for
climate.

16:06:29 Arthur Jefford : but the sports car is electric, the Toyota is gas
driven.

## Ives de Saeger. Smart Cases for Business TRIZ

16:36:53 Richard : Dear Ives, you are touching upon the "fundamentals" as is
formulating your case, simplify and find the functions, than entering the
abstraction level, solve the ideal solution, and transform it back to reality.
What was the responce from your customers, did you guide them into the TRIZ or
just kept them informed, and showed the outcomes?

16:40:36 Lixin Wang : What is the relation between attribute and parameter?

16:44:06 Lixin Wang : object - attribute - parameter - value is better
understanding hierachy structure?

16:44:08 Gian-Lluis Ribechini : Attribute may be intangible. Parameters could
be?

16:56:35 Oliver Mayer : Comment @Valeri, I would not care if we make FA
"right" or "wrong" and disqualify us this way. The goal is to solve problems,
not to run a methodolgy in purity. If it helps to concentrate on parameters -
go for it.

## Valeri Souchkov. Further development of Business TRIZ

16:58:09 Lixin Wang : Bussiness TRIZ or non-technical TRIZ, which is better?
besides bussiness, there exist many other fields, such as information, law,
tourism, finance ...

17:00:09 Richard : I suggest some "classical" Business TRIZ - best practice -
in order to improve the understanding and stay focus on the potential of
Business TRIZ. We could refer back to the evolution in technical TRIZ, like
Product development, processing system, model system....

17:00:51 Anton Kozhemyako : TRIZ for artificial social systems perhaps. But
the huge part of them are business systems at least.

17:01:07 ives@p41.be : Software algorithms, organizational issues and cultural
issues are domains missing for me.

17:04:27 David P Isaac : Any specific area for application of Value Conflict
Mapping - in business areas like banking, software development etc?

17:08:30 Hans-Gert Gräbe : In Software "Data Analysts" get more and more
important. Is this an issue for Business TRIZ?

17:10:07 Ralf Laue : Anton, What's the title of your book?

17:13:21 Richard : Seriously, I know there are some fondations e.g. EU, that
welcoming cross-international project proposal to execute and address generic
problems.

17:13:32 Anton Kozhemyako : Psychological effects in management and marketing.
100+ ways to improve efficiency in management and sales.
<https://bmtriz.ru/anton_kozhemyako_psihologicheskie_effekty_v_menedzhmente_i_marketinge_100_napravleniy_povysheniya_effektivnosti_v_upravlenii_i_sbyte/>

17:21:59 Maksymilian Smolnik : Generally speaking, is Bussines TRIZ more
process-oriented than Technical TRIZ, and Tech TRIZ is more object-oriented
than Bussines TRIZ? Or is this a unjustified oversimplification?

17:29:22 Siegfried Weigert : Can we do a follow-up session after some
"digesting time", say in two or three months?  There was a lot of useful
information but for a BizTriz Newbee way to much.  I am sure there will be
more questions after having re-read the presentations.  What do you think.
Does anyone else have the same thoughts?

17:30:28 David P Isaac : yes - me too

17:30:47 Richard : I think is a great idea …

17:30:50 Anton Kozhemyako : So do I. It's great idea.

17:31:04 Siegfried Weigert : It would be easier when people send in their
questions in advance.

17:33:08 Anton Kozhemyako : There are some questions according to aims from
Valery's presentation to prospective meeting. Isn't it?
